> Replication:

Replication means keeping the same data on multiple servers. 
So if one server get crashed, another server already has the data and appliaction keeps running.

> Replica set:

A replica set is a group of mongodb server that keep the same data.
It usually has one primary and multiple secondary servers.

> Oplog:

Oplog is a special capped collection that records all write operations performed on the primary node. 
Secondary nodes reads the operation and apply the same to stay in sync.

> If Primary Crashes, How MongoDB Chooses New Primary:

- When the primary server crashes, the secondary servers first detect that the primary is not responding. This is done using heartbeat.
  (Heartbeat is a small signal that servers send to each other again and again to check if everyone is alive)
- Then one of the secondary servers becomes a candidate. After that, voting happens automatically.
- The server which gets majority votes wins. Finally, that server becomes the new primary.


> Write Concern:

- write concern decides when should MongoDB tell that a write operation is successful.
- By default, MongoDB uses w:1. That means as soon as the primary server writes the data, MongoDB immediately sends success msg to the client. 
  This is fast, but if the primary crashes before secondaries copy, we could lose that data.
- If we use w: 'majority', MongoDB waits until majority of secondaries also save the data. Only after majority confirmation does it return success. 
  This is slower, but much safer because the data already exists on multiple servers.

  db.collection.insertOne(
    { name: "John" },
    { writeConcern: { w: "majority" } }
  )

> when majority is useful?

We use majority write concern for important data like payments, orders, financial transactions, or important logs.
For normal data, default is enough.


> Read Preference:

read preference decides which server should MongoDB reads data from. 
By default it reads from the primary because primary always has the latest data. 
We can also read from secondary to reduce load on primary, but secondaries may have slightly old data due to replication lag, 
so for imp things like login or payments we always use primary


Note:
- MongoDB replication is asynchronous by default.
  That means primary does not wait for secondary servers to copy data. It confirms write immediately.
- But if we use write concern majority, then primary waits until most servers copy the data.
- So it becomes synchronous.