> What is React?

React was developed by the Facebook Software Engineer Jordan Walke.

React is a JavaScript library that we use to build user interfaces, especially for single page applications.
It uses a component-based architecture, so we can create reusable components
It also Virtual DOM to only the necessary parts of the UI without reloading the entire page.


> How does React Work?

React creates a VIRTUAL DOM in memory.
Instead of manipulating the browser's DOM directly, React creates a virtual DOM in memory, where it does all the necessary manipulations, before making the changes in the real DOM.


> What are the advantages of React?

React provides better performance using virtual dom, 
supports reusable components through component-based architecture, 
It helps developers to build interactive single-page applications.


> What are the limitations of React?

React focuses only on the UI layer, so additional libraries are needed for full application development. 
Also, the ecosystem changes frequently, and beginners may initially find JSX difficult.


> Why React?

React follows a component-based architecture, so we can divide the UI into reusable components. 
This helps in scaling large applications. 
Also, React uses a Virtual DOM which updates only the necessary parts of the UI instead of reloading the entire page, 
so the performance is better compared to traditional DOM manipulation.


> Library vs Framework:

A library is a collection of functions that we use when needed, and we control the flow of the program. 
A framework provides a structure for building applications, and it controls the flow of the program. 
In simple terms, when we use a library we call it when we need it, but in a framework our code runs inside the framework's structure.

> What is Create React App?
Create React App is a tool used to set up a React project quickly. It automatically configures things like Webpack and Babel 
so developers can start building React applications without setting up the environment manually.



> Code Example (React Component):

function Welcome() {
  return <h1>Hello Hiba!</h1>
}
export default Welcome

Here, function Welcome() is a React component which returns what UI should display.
<h1>Hello Hiba!</h1> → JSX (HTML inside JavaScript)
This component will render: Hello Hiba!


Note:

- The latest version of React is React 19 (around 19.2.x).
- React was first released in 2013 as an open-source JavaScript library.
- React was first used internally in Facebook’s News Feed in 2011, and later used in Instagram in 2012.
- React native used for mobile development
  Reactjs used for Web development
- React represents the view layer in the Model–View–Controller (MVC) architecture.  It is responsible for building and displaying the user interface.


