Data Structure:

A data structure is a way to organize data in a proper format so that we can easily search, insert, delete, or update it
In MongoDB, the index uses a B-Tree data structure.

1. Tree (General Tree):
A tree is a way of arranging data in a hierarchical form — like a family tree.
It has a root (top node) and it has children and those children can have more children.

2. Binary Tree:
A Binary Tree is a tree where each node can have at most two children:
Left child
Right child
There is no rule about sorting here.

3. Binary Search Tree (BST) — How it works
A Binary Search Tree is a special type of binary tree with a sorting rule:
Left side contains smaller values
Right side contains larger values



Indexing:

An index is a separate data structure that stores field values in sorted order, 
so MongoDB can find data quickly without checking whole collection.

With an index, MongoDB performs an index scan (IXSCAN)
It improves query performance by reducing the number of documents scanned.
It makes search operations faster.

> Default _id Index:
Whenever we create a collection, MongoDB automatically creates a unique index on the _id field. 
This index makes sure every document inside collection is unique.

> Creating an Index:

db.users.createIndex({ age: 1 })  // ascending index
db.users.createIndex({ age: -1 })  // descending index

> Deleting an Index
Removes it when it is no longer useful.

db.users.dropIndex({ age: 1 })
db.users.dropIndex({ age: -1 })


> When to Use Indexes:
a. A field is searched repeatedly
b. when we often sort or filter using that field etc.


> When NOT to Use Indexes:
a. Field is rarely searched
b. If there are many inserts and updates, too many indexes can slow down performance because MongoDB must update them every time.
c. If a query returns most of the collection, index is not useful.
   Boolean field (true/false)
   Gender field (male/female)

 
> Using explain():
explain() shows how MongoDB runs a query.
It only shows performance details like whether an index was used or it scanned the whole collection etc.
- db.users.find({ age: 25 }).explain()


> explain("executionStats"):
It is used to analyze query performance in detail.
It shows details like how many documents were returned, how many were scanned, 
how much time it took, and whether MongoDB used an index or did a full collection scan
- db.users.find({ age: 25 }).explain("executionStats")


> Covered Queries:
A query is called a covered query when all the fields used in the filter and the projection are already in the index,
so MongoDB doesn’t need to read the actual documents.


> Winning Plan:
Winning plan means the best execution plan MongoDB chooses to run the query and we can see it inside explain()
It selects the most efficient index based on cost.
Other possible plans are shown as rejected plans.

COLLSCAN happens when MongoDB scans the entire collection to find matching documents.
IXSCAN happens when MongoDB uses an index to find documents instead of scanning everything.
IXSCAN is usually better because it reduces the number of documents examined and improves performance.
However, if a query returns most of the collection, using an index may not be beneficial.

Left prefix rule means that in a compound index, MongoDB can use the index only if the query starts from the first indexed field and 
follows the index order without skipping fields.

limit():
limit() is used to control how many documents should return.
db.users.find().limit(5)


Projection:
Projection is used to select only required fields from documents.
db.users.find({}, { name: 1, _id: 0 })



Note: 
To get the number of documnts returned using find() is db.collectiton.find({...}).count()
To clear terminal : cls (clear shell)
To delete collection : db.collection.drop()
To remove Index : db.collection.dropIndex({age(field) : 1(ascending)})
To check how many index present : db.collection.getIndexes()